Hello and welcome to the Harvest Baptist Church sermon podcast.
We are honored that you would click on this and listen to God's word preached by one of our elders.
At the same time, we strongly affirm the biblical mandate for Christians to be faithfully active and in-person part of their local church.
This sermon cannot and will not replace what a local church can provide to the life of a Christian.
That being said,
We hope that this sermon challenges and encourages you in your faith and that it builds upon the faithful ministry of your local church.
We hope that you enjoy.
God bless.
Take your Bible with me and open it to the book of Matthew.
That's a long way from Exodus.
May be guilty of watching too many movies, but have you noticed that sequels to movies tend at times to fail when they weren't intended, when writers hadn't intended of making another movie.
For instance, I tend to think of Pirates of the Caribbean.
It kind of goes downhill after number one.
And you can think of other movie franchises that seem to go downhill after the first movie.
But if you think of the movie series that the authors, maybe it was based on a book, when the author and the people who created the movie intended for there to be a sequel, those movie franchises seem to succeed quite well.
For instance, if you take Lord of the Rings, Tolkien's Lord of the Rings,
Um, of course, Tolkien wrote all of it at one time.
And, um, but when the movies started being created, they were created in mind for there to be sequels for there to be three parts.
Well, the Bible, I believe is somewhat of that sort because the Old Testament was not created for that to be the end.
Right?
Even, even modern day Jews who don't confess Christ as the Messiah believe that the Old Testament was not the end, that there is a Messiah to come, though they deny the true Messiah that came.
They do look for another.
But as Augustine put it, the Old Testament has the New Testament in it.
It's just concealed in the Old Testament has the New Testament, the New Testament has the old in it and it is revealed.
And so what we have this morning in Matthew chapter two is the sequel.
It is the sequel to the Exodus.
We've been studying the book of Exodus and as we ended chapter 11 last week, thought it would be fitting to go ahead and see the climax because that is what is calling out in the Old Testament for a climax to come.
You see all the sacrifices, all the day of atonements and we're not there yet, but you get to Leviticus and you get,
thousands of sacrifices year after year.
And if by faith, right, you were reading and keeping up, you would have been saying, when is the final sacrifice coming?
When is all of this finally going to be over?
Well, the New Testament says it is and the New Testament is the climax and it calls out to us.
So this morning, as we look at the gospel of Matthew and we look at the final Exodus, if you'll stand with me for the reading of God's word,
Now, after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the King, behold, wise men from the East came to Jerusalem saying, where is he who has been born King of the Jews?
For we saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.
When Herod the King heard this, he was troubled all Jerusalem with him.
Interesting question.
We know why Herod was troubled, but why would Jerusalem be troubled?
Ever thought of that?
Why was all of Jerusalem?
Why were all the people troubled?
In assembling all the chief priests and the scribes of the people, he inquired of them where Christ was to be born.
And they told him in Bethlehem of Judea, for so it is written by the prophet, Micah.
And you, O Bethlehem of the land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah.
For from you shall come a ruler who will shepherd my people
Israel.
Now, there's actually two prophecies put in there.
There's the prophecy of Micah, but also Numbers 24, 17.
Bala makes a prophecy that a star will come out of Judah as well in the land of Judah.
And so that is put in there.
Well, it's almost like a put together prophecy in verse seven.
And Herod summoned the wise men secretly and ascertained from them what time the star had appeared.
And he sent them to Bethlehem saying, go and search diligently for the child.
And when you have found him, bring me word that I too may come and worship him.
After listening to the king, they went on their way.
And behold, the star that they had seen when it rose went before them until it came to rest over the place where the child was.
When they saw the star, they rejoiced exceedingly with great joy.
And going into the house, they saw the child with Mary, his mother, and they fell down and they worshiped him.
Then opening their treasures, they offered him gifts, gold, frankincense,
and Mer being warned in a dream not to return to Herod.
They departed to their country by another way when they had departed.
Behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph and a dream rise, take the child and his mother and flee and flee to Egypt and remain there until I tell you for Herod is about to search for the child to destroy him.
He rose into the child and his mother by night and departed to Egypt.
and remained there until the death of Herod.
This was to fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet, out of Egypt, I shall call my son.
That's quote from Hosea chapter 11 verse one.
We saw Egypt three times mentioned here.
Then Herod, when he saw that he had been tricked by the wise man, became furious and sent and killed all the male children in Bethlehem.
And in that region who were two years old or under, according to the time that he had ascertained from the wise man.
Then was fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah.
A voice was heard in Ramah weeping and loud lamentation.
Rachel weeping for her children.
She refused to be comforted because they are no more.
But when Herod died, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, rise, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel.
For those who saw the child's life are dead.
And he rose, took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there.
And being warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee.
He went and lived in a city called Nazareth.
So that was spoken by the prophets might be fulfilled that he would be called a Nazarene.
Father, help us this morning to see
the Christmas story.
Give us eyes to see and hearts to listen and heed it to our own life.
Give us hands to be obedient.
Make us what we are not.
Teach us what we do not know for your glory.
We ask it in Jesus' name.
And all God's people said, amen.
You may be seated.
Now, if you stop and think about it for just a minute,
If you think about every, all the characters and all the types and all the things that we've talked about in the book of Exodus so far, so many of those are repeated in Matthew chapter two, right?
You have Pharaoh, you have this wicked leader, you have Herod, okay?
You have, of course, you have children in Exodus early who are massacred and here we see that massacre of innocent children as well, okay?
We see God's providence in that.
We see God's providence here.
wise men in Egypt, you have the magi, the magicians, you have the magi here, right?
You have, there's so many types and so many things that are brought about that if you think through the story as we're going to see this morning, um, our patterns of how God works.
And so I want to, I want to somewhat sum up everything that we've kind of said in excess, those far, um, and we don't want to take much, but I want to do that through looking really,
at two main, two characters, okay?
First, I want us to kind of zoom in on these wise men and also the antagonist that is Herod.
And then I want us to zoom in on the protagonist.
Of course, in Exodus, that's Moses, but as we just sung, there's a greater Moses.
And that is Christ.
I want us to kind of zoom in on those two characters this morning.
One lessons we have taken away from Exodus, and we can take away this morning in this Advent season.
And so the first thing, let's think about these wise men.
You know, there are some things that we do not know about these wise men.
If you think about the usual nativity scene and what we usually think we know, even the hymn that's been sung millions of times.
We three kings.
Well, we don't know that there was three of them, right?
Why do we think that there was a trinity of them?
Because they brought gold, frankincense and myrrh.
So somewhere in the middle of that, we thought there was three.
Okay.
We don't know that.
Actually, I think implied that the whole of Jerusalem was troubled when they came, means that there was an entourage, that there was a big number.
We don't know that there was three, and we don't know that they were kings.
We're nowhere told that they're kings.
Because they brought so much wealth with them to lay before the newborn king, it's usually associated, that much wealth was only associated in that time period in ancient Near East and in the Roman and Greek worlds with monarchs, with royalty.
But what we do know is they're referred to as magi.
These wise men.
So what do we know about them?
You think about something else we don't know, I just thought of.
It says here, they went to Bethlehem and they went to the house.
When they arrive, Jesus is not a baby, right?
He says, go find out.
When did you see the star?
Herod asked him.
You remember, when did you see the star?
Go find the child.
They come back.
They ascertain that the child would have been somewhere around two years old.
So that's why he kills all the male children, two and under.
Okay.
All right.
So we assume that Jesus is somewhere around the age of two.
So when the wise men show up, it's not at the, it's not at the stable.
It's, it's not, uh, not at all.
It's, it's not at the manger.
They go to a house and they go to a house.
Okay.
So just to take all in there, what actually is in the text.
So there's a lot of things that we don't know, but what do we know about them?
They're, they're magi.
They're called wise men.
Um, there were men of astrology in,
and probably somewhere from Persia, Iraq.
They were king makers.
They were counselors to kings and kingdoms they would have had magi.
Just like Pharaoh had his magi, right?
Now we know Pharaoh's magi, the magicians were a part of the black arcs and when Moses would turn the staff into a snake, they would also do the same thing.
When he would turn the Nile into blood,
the power of God, they would turn water into blood as well through the dark arts.
Now, not all match our part of dark arts that would have been in different places.
They were mostly for some part of astrologers.
They were, they would have studied the sky, the stars, and they would even counsel to kings based on what they learned or what they thought.
And they'd have made prophecies and that sort of thing.
So that being said, one thing we need to be careful when we speculate.
Let's talk to the youth this morning.
There are a lot of speculations we make about the Christmas story and that's okay.
As long as we say we're making speculation, we should be clear when we are speculating.
And when the Bible is silent, we too should be very careful and hesitant to what we say about it.
And if we say something that's not in scripture, we should note that, shouldn't we?
And so we need to, but what do we know?
These are the things that we do know.
But the main thing is here, we do know they came with a question on their lips.
Where is the king so that we can worship him?
And of course, they had more on their mind than just coming to a regular monarch.
They wanted to worship him.
And of course, we know the gifts that they brought, gold.
Gold was given only to kings in that time.
It was a gift fit for a king.
So they came to a king, but they also brought frankincense.
We read in Sunday School of the Youth a account of when Zacchaeus was in the temple.
And it was at the time of innocent incense.
And he was at the altar of incense when the angel appeared and the people were outside bringing up prayers of incense.
What is frankincense?
Frankincense is what was used in temples.
This is what was used by priests to symbolize the prayers of the people.
And so this is a king, but in some way these wise men are anticipating this is also a priest of some kind.
Now were they taught this by, you know, people speculated that when Daniel and Ezekiel were in exile, perhaps they passed alone.
Some of their prophecies and the scripture that they had written that the magi would have got hold of, they would have knew to look for these sort of things.
But the last thing they brought was myrrh.
Now that one's, that one's quite different.
That would be something quite odd to give someone at birth.
When the women,
on Easter morning appear at the tomb of Christ to anoint the dead body of Christ.
They would have had within Murr.
It's what you use for dead bodies.
So here they're anticipating something of the death of this king, this priest as well.
So we know these are the gifts that they bring.
Now we don't know much about the star.
Some people have speculated that it was a comet that guided them, you know, that they began their journey.
Some people have speculated that in the constellation of PCs, there was two planets that were so close, it made this great illumination and that's what pointed them.
Or perhaps it was something similar to the glory of God, a miraculous working of the Lord as God led the children of Israel out of Egypt with a cloud by day and fire by some kind of miraculous working star like that.
Now, if I had to pick one of the three, I'd speculate the third one, but I don't know.
We don't know.
We're not sure.
But we do know this, that they have come to worship the King.
Now, something that's usually not said about the wise men.
I do want to say, if you look in verse seven,
They are wise men, but maybe not wise enough.
They seem to make a bad judgment call.
You see in verse seven, it says, when Heron summoned the wise men secretly and ascertained from what time the star had appeared, he sent them to Bethlehem.
If any time a politician wants to talk to you in secret, anybody with much wisdom would know something is going on, something is up.
And of course, in verse 12, we read in being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed to their own country by another way.
They were warned about something that they should have already have sensed.
They should have sensed that this man was not up to any good.
Now they're important people.
They are kingly counsel.
They're rich people.
They're important people.
Herod is appointed in Rome, the governor of the king over Judea.
He's an important person.
It makes sense to go to him.
But then it doesn't make much sense to listen to one.
Now, and it says that the end of verse 12 wouldn't say they departed this country by another way.
They were warned in a dream.
They're warned by the providence of God.
Now, one thing I think we need to take away by these wise men as we're going to circle back to the wise men in Egypt as well is that our plans, God's plans for us very often bring up obstacles.
See, we don't tend to think of the Christmas story and all the obstacles and all the pain and all the suffering that comes along with the true Christmas story.
We tend to want, if you're like me, I love the Christmas season and I want to paint it with all the Christmas colors.
We don't want anything to go wrong.
Is that you and your family?
You know, nothing could go wrong during Christmas.
Nobody can get sick.
In fact, we're kind of sensitive to that because Henry has never got to go to any of our family Christmas gatherings.
Two years in a row, he's been sick.
Two years in a row, we've not been able to attend Christmas get-togethers.
Henry's not been able to go.
And that's sad, isn't he?
He's never even gotten to be at one, right?
You want Christmas to just be perfect, right?
You don't want anything to go wrong.
But you know, I was reminded Friday was our last day of school that there are a lot of obstacles for a lot of people at Christmastime.
It was finals at school and at high school, you can ask high school teacher.
At the last day in high school of the semester, there's not a lot of people there.
And kids came in my room and I simply was asking, but jokingly, but seriously, why did you come to school today?
I don't want to babysit you.
I was hoping to have it off day.
Why are you here?
The truth of the matter is some of them come to school in the last day because it might be the last time they really get interaction for a couple of weeks with somebody.
That's true for a lot of them.
For a lot of them, it may be last time they get a good hot meal.
There are a lot of obstacles at Christmas time that we tend not to think about.
There's a lot of obstacles in this Christmas story we tend not to think of and we kind of oversee it.
When Moses went to Egypt, it wasn't all fun and games.
In fact, he was seemingly a failure to everybody.
The Egyptian people, the Israelite people, the Pharaoh, I mean, the only one he was faithful to, in fact, was the Lord.
In this Christmas story, the wise men go to an obstacle.
Mary, you think of all her obstacles, Joseph and all that.
There's obstacles everywhere in the Christmas story.
Now we face obstacles, of course.
Not only do we face our own sinful desires in our own flesh, but we also, we need to, we need not to paint over the truth of Christmas.
That is the truth of really everyday Christian life.
That is not only do we fight against our sinful desires in our own flesh.
We also fight the world, the flesh and the devil.
And we need not to be apathetic in that way.
You see, in Revelation chapter 12, it really tells what background is going on in this Christmas story.
Revelation chapter 12 talks about the great dragon who is waiting at the womb of the virgin to consume the Messiah, to consume her child.
You see, Satan is, and all his forces are working and great battles taking place at this Christmas.
You know, we're told in Ephesians chapter one, we think about our own lives, that we are seated with Christ in high places, and all the gifts of heaven are ours in the heavenly places.
And we think, yes, and amen to that, and it is glorious, but something else we miss is that it is in the heavenly places where the conflict is really going on.
Ephesians chapter six tells, we don't wrestle against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers and dark forces where?
In the heavenly places.
And the heavenly place is just where the conflict zone really is.
And there's a conflict going on.
And there's a conflict going on in Christmas.
There's a conflict, you know, and we've talked about that all throughout the Exodus story that what really is going on in this Exodus story, it is Yahweh versus the gods of Egypt.
And he is victorious over and over again.
And what is really being played out in Exodus story is really the first prophecy that the serpent is trying to consume the seed.
of the woman, the seed who's going to crush his head.
In Revelation 12, that serpent has now become a dragon and he's still wanting to consume the seed of the woman who was going to crush his head.
And that's what's going on here this Christmas story.
And that same serpent is still wanting to crush the seeds church today.
He's still wanting to crush us.
And there is a conflict going on.
We don't need to overlook that.
Now a few things should be said about such a conflict this Christmas season.
Those who are not Christians are not really in the conflict.
Not really in the conflict.
You see, people without Christ, we've talked about how Pharaoh is a picture of sinners last week, that he hardened his own heart.
Pharaoh wanted to be God and he wanted no one else to be God.
Herod here is shaken in his soul.
He says he's troubled when the wise men come and hear that another king has been born.
Herod was so paranoid that he even had people in his family murdered who might threaten to take his throne one day.
In fact, Herod was such a man, you've probably heard this before, that when Herod died, he had given instructions for people who are well known in Jerusalem to be killed that same day as well, so that people would actually wail and cry the day he died, that there would actually be mourning.
The man was very paranoid.
The last thing he wanted was somebody taking his throne.
And that is a picture of a sinner, someone outside of Christ who doesn't want anyone else to rule their life but him.
Bible tells us that we are by nature, children of wrath.
The plagues that come on Sodom, the plagues that come on Egypt are plagues that we deserve because our very sin denies the very ontology, the very essence of who God is as ruler and creator.
Now, however, this fight is not really ongoing for those who are outside of Christ, but there is a battle going on for those who are coming to Christ.
I don't know if this was true of when you became a Christian, but it was for me.
It was so well illustrated in Pilgrim's progress when Christian gets to the wicked gate and he wants to enter into the narrow way.
And Mr.
Goodwill is sitting there at the gate and as Christian gets there with his burden, he grabs him and he throws him in the door.
He says, what are you doing?
So I'm Mr.
Goodwill.
You must be very careful right here because there's a castle up there.
Castle of Beelzebub and he shoots arrows days and night with anybody.
who comes close to the door who's waiting to enter the narrow way.
I thought about that and I thought about how many times before I came a Christian, I was at the door of starting the narrow way.
But every time for years it seemed like arrows would come, doubt would come, scared would come.
What people would think?
What if the Bible wasn't true?
What if Christ did?
I mean, all the doubts, all the fears came over and over and over again for years.
For some people coming to Christ, perhaps the battle has began.
But you know, the battle also begins when you start the Christian life.
When you do enter into the gate, the battle is not over.
In fact, it's just beginning.
So much for what passes for Christian teaching in our day says that the battle, in fact, is over when you become a Christian, but it's not.
What are the first things that Christ does with the disciples after He calls them?
He puts them into a boat and He says, let's go ride into a storm.
Isn't that a picture?
of the Christian life.
We need to know that because if you don't know that and you start off the Christian life and you think, wow, I didn't think it should go this bad.
But friend, if you know up front, that's what he's called us into.
You know what to expect.
It's also true of the battle begins usually five or 10 minutes after worship or the first 10 minutes in the car.
You think about all the prayer we had together.
You think about the worship, the confession, the fellowship, the pre, all the things the Lord does in our time together.
You know, and you're tempted to say, did you see what he was wearing?
Did you see so and so?
Right?
I mean, it's like, it's like the parable every Sunday, isn't it?
Where the seed of the word is spread and here comes the birds to pick the seeds out.
The battle begins.
The battle begins anytime you try to be obedient to the Lord.
Have you noticed if you ever try to share Christ and if you make it to the point where you actually say the name of Jesus, many times it seems like everything in the world stops and stares because all of hell wants to fight against the name of Christ being proclaimed or the gospel being spoken.
Now there are some things we do need to remember as his people.
We need to remember that Herod was defeated in the Christmas story, that Pharaoh is defeated as we sung about and that Satan is a real enemy and he still fights, but in fact he is a defeated foe and we fight from victory.
We don't fight for victory.
However, that doesn't mean that we're not to be sensitive to obey the scripture, obedient to the Holy spirit, obedient to his word.
You know, we need day by day, hour by hour to be sensitive.
As the wise men in verse 12 heard the word of God, by the providence of God by dream and went another way.
There's a word right there for us Christians, isn't it?
I don't know if you're like me.
You tend to think that every door that seems to open, every possibility in your life, you think it's God's will.
This is what God, it's what's before me.
But that's not always true, is it?
It's not always true.
What's in front of us is not always
what we need to do was not always God's will, right?
We need to be sensitive to be led by Godly counsel, by good friends, by the spirit of God, by the word of God.
You know, you wish there was a formula.
You wish when there was an option before you a decision to be made in your life and you say, Hey, so what does the Bible say about that?
There's really not a verse I can point to you there to help you out and you want an answer.
You know, it's kind of like that with raising children, isn't it, parents?
You wish you had a formula where you could, in fact, say, do these things and out comes a godly child at 16 years old.
There's no formula in the scripture for that, is there?
Nothing but Romans 12 offer your body as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to the Lord in view of God's mercy.
Walk hour by hour by the guiding of the Holy Spirit, by obedience to his word and long obedience
Right?
And help him, let him lead you and guide you every day and every moment.
That is the formula.
That is what we're reminded.
You see these wise men, they come to see the king and worship the king.
That's what we know.
That's what was on their lips.
And they end up following him.
And what happened with the wise men in Egypt?
They were defeated and they end up telling Pharaoh, we can't do what Yahweh can do.
He's much greater than we are.
So the next thing we want to
pipe in on here and look closely at is Jesus.
Of course, the main character, the protagonist is Christ.
Look at verse 13 with me in Matthew chapter two.
It says, when they had departed the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, rise, take the child and his mother and flee to Egypt.
Remain there until I tell you for Herod is about to search for the child to destroy him.
He rose and took the child and his mother, Nigh, and departed to Egypt.
And remained there until the death of Herod.
This was to fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet.
Out of Egypt, I called my son.
Now it doesn't take a literary genius to look at this prophecy and see that it's a little bit different than the one used earlier in the text.
This prophecy is not futuristic.
Read it again there at the end of verse 15.
Out of Egypt, I called.
My son, that's past tense.
You see, there's two types of prophecy in the scripture.
There is the prophecy that's verbal.
The Messiah will be born in Bethlehem.
It's verbal, it's futuristic there.
There's also prophecy which comes in types.
And this is one of those prophecies.
Now, Hosea, this was written, of course, in the first exile when God's people were taken by the Assyrians into exile and refers to here that out of Egypt, I shall call
My son, this was referring of course to that exile, this exile that was being taken here, an exile that also when God had called his people out of Egypt.
But why would Matthew use it here?
Why would Matthew refer to it that when Christ came and that when he left Judea, left Bethlehem to go to Egypt, that this was being fulfilled?
Because what happened in Exodus was a type of what Christ would accomplish
in Matthew, in the Gospels.
You see, Exodus is like a picture book.
It's what to expect.
It's a type.
As we sung, the true and better Moses, the true and better Adam, the true and better David.
And what's going on here?
Well, there's a, you know, a few reasons that Joseph would go to Egypt.
One, of course, the angel
in a dream told him to, but there was a good population of Jews in Egypt at the time they would have gone to.
But this has a much greater significance.
It is this type being fulfilled.
In fact, in Luke's gospel, when at the Mount of Transfiguration, when appears there Elijah and Moses on the Mount of Transfiguration with Peter, James and John, Luke tells us that the topic of conversation was the exodus that Christ would accomplish in Jerusalem.
the exit Moses and Christ are talking about the exodus that he would accomplish in Jerusalem.
What's all that mean?
It all that means that the true exodus that's needed, the true bondage that needs to come out would be accomplished for God's people by what Christ was going to do in Jerusalem, which was through his death and resurrection.
You see, it's one thing to be,
physical bondage to be gone, to leave out.
That's well great and good, but spiritual bondage is even better.
And this is the part we got to zoom in on really.
I want you to pay attention to this morning for going to understand Christmas.
And if Christmas is going to be all that it should be for us, this is the part that we have to learn.
This is the part we have to get to.
And it really could be in that simple phrase that the angel called and told Mary, call him Jesus for he will save his people from their sins.
You say, what does the exodus have to do with the Christmas story?
The true exodus that God's people needed, Christ would accomplish.
You say, I'm not in bondage.
But friend, if you don't understand the bondage you were in outside of Christ, Christmas will mean very little to you.
You see, what's the context of Hosea?
You may remember for a minute, Hosea.
Hosea had a wife named Gomer.
I don't have a lot of marriage advice.
If you're unmarried this morning, no matter what age,
anywhere from eight up, or five up.
I don't have much marriage advice to give you, but here's one.
If you ever find a woman named Gomer, it's not a good idea.
Just saying.
Right?
You marry a woman named Gomer, you're already asking for it, I think.
But Gomer tells us that, Hosea tells us that his wife, Gomer, played Hortam.
She was a prostitute.
After they were married, she went after other lovers.
She begot illegitimate children.
And instead of doing away with his wife, when she was participating in all that ungodliness, Hosea didn't forsake her.
He traveled after her to make sure she was taken care of.
And in fact, when she had gotten so much into her sin that she was going to be sold into slavery, he entered into the slave market while she was on the slave block and bought her with 50 pieces of silver
and a Homer and a half of barley.
Now apparently that's a lot of barley.
But he went, he didn't forsake her.
But you see, this was an illustration of God telling Hosea, do you see how you feel about how your wife has treated you?
Now you get it.
This is how Israel has treated me and her idolatry.
And what we have in Gomer is a picture of sin, of our sin, of her sin.
And if you don't see sin as vile, if you don't see your sin as vile as you see Gomer's sin, then you won't understand Christmas hardly at all because it is that sin, the shame, the guilt that holds one in bondage.
We have to see that.
And when God comes to people in sin, in bondage, in the scripture, it's never a good thing.
You see, we read last week in Ephesians 11, what did God tell Pharaoh?
God told Pharaoh through his prophet Moses, I'm coming to Egypt.
And that meant to say what's coming next, the death angel, I'm coming and I'm going to kill every firstborn child who did not slaughter, slaughter the blood of the lamb and put it on the doorpost.
God was coming to visit when God came to Sodom, the angel of the Lord came to Sodom.
It didn't end up too well for sinners.
When they have in Abihu and Leviticus chapter 10, come before the Lord in the presence of the Lord as sinners, it didn't go well with them.
There was a reason when the high priests entered into the presence of the Lord in the Holy of Holies, they tied a rope to his foot.
Just in case he didn't do the sacrifices right and he was to drop dead, they didn't have to go in after him.
They would just pull him out.
Being in the Emmanuel God with us in the Old Testament was meant to be, Oh no, not good.
Samson's parents, when the Lord appears to them, when God appears to them and tells them about their son Samson that's going to be born in the Book of Judges, once the angel leaves, they say, how did we live?
How did we live after seeing God's face?
For sinners to be in the presence of God.
When John writes in John 1, chapter 14, he come and dwelt among us and we beheld his glory.
Every Old Testament person and student who had followed along, when John wrote that, they would have said, that's not possible.
It's not possible that God became flesh and dwelt amongst sinful men because every one of them would drop dead.
There's no way that's possible.
See, that's the glory of Christmas.
That he did come and dwell among sinners.
God came and dwelt among sinners and all of them didn't perish right when he was born.
The glory of the Christmas story is that he did not come into the world to condemn the world, but that through him the world
might be saved.
That is the glory of the Christmas story.
And it's seen again in verse 16 through 18.
I want to read this to us and wrap this up.
And Herod, when he saw it being tricked by the wise men, became furious.
He sent and killed all the male children in Bethlehem.
All the region who were two years older under, according to the time that had ascertained from the wise men, then was fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah.
A voice was heard in Ramah weeping in loud limitations.
Rachel weeping for her children and refused to be comforted because they are no more.
I want to say something about this prophecy of Jeremiah that Matthew points out for us is fulfilled in this act of Herod.
One, Rachel.
This is a prophecy.
Now Jeremiah, of course, this is also a prophecy that happens in the midst of exile, the first exile when Jeremiah writes.
Now what does Rachel have to do with that?
You see that in the third line.
Rachel weeping for her children.
Rachel is, of course, the favorite wife of Jacob.
And all of Israel was seen as Rachel was their mother, all of Israel.
And when they go into the first exile, Rachel's weeping and lamenting would have seen as a mother who's lost her children.
A mother, a parent, you know the feeling if you've ever been out in public and you can't find your children, that kind of panic.
That's what's kind of being brought out here about the first exile.
The great American novel, Moby Dick, there's a scene in it when the Pequod, that is the
By the way, Moby Dick is really a theological book, if anything.
He's made a ton of illusions.
The captain of the Piquad is Ahab, and he's on his monomaniacal quest for the white whale.
And you see this whale who's taking his leg.
And he's going, he's got one focus.
That is to kill that white whale.
Now there's a custom for maritime in that time.
If a ship was to come up to another ship that was wrecked,
Okay, in the sea, it was custom that the captain of that ship and the crew of the ship that came upon that, they would do everything possible to help that crew out.
Anyway, as many as they could take on, they would do anything possible to help out.
Sure enough, the Pequod captain, they come across a ship that's been wrecked, and they find a captain.
The captain's got the megaphone.
He begins to cry out, we need help.
We need help.
I can't find half my crew.
King Ahab replies, have you seen the white whale?
No.
King Ahab, instead of helping, continues on, leaving that captain and that crew absolutely shipwrecked.
And the name of that ship that was left by King Ahab is named Rachel.
And so all that to be said, the wicked King Ahab, Melville here,
Of course, seeing Ahab as this evil king in the Bible gives us, you know, King Ahab and Jezebel as wicked rulers.
That here is in contrast, of course, to the earlier prophecy in verse six, that the one born in Bethlehem would be a shepherd to my people.
Now you remember Moses was a shepherd before he was a prophet.
You remember David was a shepherd before he became king.
This Messiah would be a,
shepherd king.
He would care for his sheep.
He would love them.
Jesus even calls himself in John 10, the good shepherd who lays his life down for his sheep.
That meaning that the good shepherd, the plagues that his people deserved, he takes on himself.
And as Christians, we know that happens at Calvary.
Now we think of all that and we see how the protagonist here doesn't leave us shipwrecked, but in fact saves us.
We see in all of this the providence of God, even in this prophecy.
We see noted earlier the Balaam, the rising star in the East that this probably may not know that Balaam was a pagan prophet, but he prophesied of the star, Micah's prophecy in verse six in Bethlehem.
Who brought that about?
Why was, why was Jesus born in Bethlehem?
Because Caesar Augustus decreed it a wicked ruler in Rome and uh, Hosea, why did the quote from Hosea out of Egypt?
I've called my son.
Why did Jesus leave Bethlehem and go to Egypt?
because of Herod's attempt to kill all the male children.
But on all of this, God's word was fulfilled by wicked desires of evil rulers.
How proven is our God?
How God works everything out according to his purposes.
And Fran, you and I should never doubt if he can work all of those things out on a world stage and he can work everything in our life for good as well.
And we must stop and ask ourselves, what is the good he's working it out for in our life?
We usually use that verse Romans eight.
He uses, he works all things together for good who love those who love and called to his purpose.
That's well and good.
But do we read the next verse?
What is the good to be conformed to the image of his son?
You see what's going on in Exodus.
He's taken a nation from slavery and he's making a nation of priests.
They're going from slavery to Sabbath.
See, there's a lot of things in this Christmas story we don't know.
What were the wise men's names?
When were they born?
You know, we don't know about the star.
We don't know about the comet.
We don't know all these things, but we do know one thing's for sure.
They come to worship.
They come to worship the king this morning.
Wouldn't we say he is worthy of worship?
Let's pray.
Father, thank you for such a narrative.
Thank you for such a gospel, a gospel of your providence.
a gospel of your glory, a gospel of your grace.
Father, we rejoice in it this morning that you have saved us in such a glorious way.
You have saved us in such a way that no man can boast in your presence.
None of us can say that we are here this morning because of our attendance or our deeds or our giving.
None of us can say that.
We can only say we're here because we have been saved by a great King.
a king who has become our priest or high priest in a high priest who's become our sacrifice.
And such a sacrifice, whereas he has took in our sins and our burdens, our shame and our guilt.
And he has given us his righteousness.
So this Christmas season, Father, we rejoice in a great exchange, which allows us to be your children.
And we cry out, Abba,
Father, thank you for this.
Help us to hold this near and dear to our heart this Advent season.
We ask it in Christ's name.
Amen.
Thank you for listening to this sermon from Harvest Baptist Church.
For more information about the church, please visit our website HarvestBC.Church.
If you would like to contact us, please email us at contact.harvestbc.gmail.com or you can call us at 706-780-2211.
If you are looking for a church home or visiting the North Georgia area, we would love for you to join us on a Sunday morning.
at 9.30 in the fellowship hall for breakfast and Sunday school, and then at 11 a.m. for our Lord's Day worship service.
We hope that you have a great week.
God bless.